README.md, before:

# 🎁 happybirthday 🍰

happybirthday is a python tool to extract surprisal-based features from text.
You can also send the repo link to colleages and friends interested in computational linguistics as a nice gesture for their birthday.

## Features
* Works with AR and masked-token models from Hugging Face
* L2R scoring is available when using a masked-token model. Results should be identical to minicons (tested in multiple situations: see test/test_minicons_compare.py).
* Extracts surprisal, entropy and the next predicted word with the highest probability (i.e. what the LLM computed would be the continuation)
* Works sentence by sentence only (for now), but you can provide a common context file for semantic continuity, it will be prepended to each sentence's context window.
* Choice of greedy algorithm or beam search to identify the most probable next word (will assemble next subtokens to reconstitute the word).
* Minimalism over performance: simple loops used in place of batching, no CUDA, nothing fancy
* Handles accented characters
* Should remain robust to LLM choice, as long as it is AR (GPT-style) or masked token.
* Simple Command Line Interface, no need to modify the code (but scoring functions can easily be loaded from your own code).

## Installation
* You will need python, install if you don't have it already.
* Install the libraries in requirements.txt:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## How to use

Input is a .tsv file. Expected columns are doc_id and text (in documents mode), or doc_id, sentence_id and sentence (in sentences mode). 
The first row is expected to be the column headers.

### Command Line Interface

```bash
python src/cli.py --input_file <file> --mode <ar|mlm> --model <model_name> [options]
```

#### Required Arguments
- `--input_file`: Path to input TSV file
- `--mode`: Model type - `ar` (autoregressive/GPT-style) or `mlm` (masked/BERT-style)
- `--model`: HuggingFace model name (e.g., `gpt2`, `bert-base-uncased`, `almanach/camembert-base`)

#### Optional Arguments
- `--output_file`: Output path (default: auto-generated with timestamp)
  - Can be a specific filename: `results.tsv`
  - Can be a folder path: `./results/` (auto-generates filename inside your folder)
- `--output_format`: Output format, either `tsv` (default) or `parquet`
- `--format`: Input format - `documents` or `sentences` (default: `sentences`)
- `--left_context_file`: Path to text file for left context (prepended to each sentence)
- `--top_k`: Number of top predictions to output (default: `3`, use `0` to disable)
- `--top_k_cf_surprisal`: If set, output counterfactual surprisal for each top-k prediction (pred_alt columns will be token|surprisal)
- `--left_context_file`: Path to text file for left context (prepended to each sentence)

#### AR Mode Options (GPT-style models)
- `--lookahead_n`: Number of continuation tokens to generate (default: `3`, use `0` to disable)
- `--lookahead_strategy`: Generation strategy - `greedy` or `beam` (default: `greedy`)
- `--beam_width`: Beam width for beam search (default: `3`, only used with `--lookahead_strategy beam`)

#### MLM Mode Options (BERT-style models)
- `--pll_metric`: Scoring variant - `original` or `within_word_l2r` (default: `original`)

### Examples

**Basic usage (AR model):**
```bash
python src/cli.py --input_file data.tsv --mode ar --model gpt2
```

**French MLM with L2R scoring:**
```bash
python src/cli.py --input_file in/demo_sentences.tsv --mode mlm --model cmarkea/distilcamembert-base --pll_metric within_word_l2r
```

**Documents format with context:**
```bash
python src/cli.py --input_file docs.tsv --format documents --mode ar --model gpt2 --left_context_file context.txt
```

**Output to specific folder:**
```bash
python src/cli.py --input_file data.tsv --mode mlm --model bert-base-uncased --output_file ./results/
```

**AR with beam search lookahead:**
```bash
python src/cli.py --input_file data.tsv --mode ar --model gpt2 --lookahead_n 5 --lookahead_strategy beam --beam_width 3
```

### Output Format

#### Main Results File

The output TSV contains:
- `doc_id`, `sentence_id`, `token_index`: Identifiers
- `token`: Raw token (with special characters like `▁`, `Ġ`)
- `token_decoded`: Human-readable token
- `is_special`: Flag for special tokens (BOS, EOS, CLS, SEP, etc.)
- `surprisal_bits`: -log₂(p(token|context))
- `entropy_bits`: Shannon entropy of the prediction distribution
- `pred_alt_1` to `pred_alt_N`: Top-k alternative predictions (N = `--top_k`)
- `pred_next_1` to `pred_next_M`: Lookahead predictions (M = `--lookahead_n`, AR mode only)

**Note**: All special tokens are included in output. Filter using `is_special` column in post-processing if needed.

## Direct Function Calls

You can also import and use the core functions directly in Python, for instance, assuming the scorer.py script is in the same folder:

```python
from scorer import process_sentences

# Standard scoring with predictions
results = process_sentences(
    sentences=["Hello world.", "How are you?"],
    mode='ar',
    model_name='gpt2',
    top_k=5,
    lookahead_n=3,
    progress=True
)
```

## Testing

Test the basics:
```bash
python test/test_basics.py
```

Compare with minicons (MLM L2R scoring):
```bash
python test/test_minicons_compare.py
```

## TODO

* Create R wrapper/package
* Add different context window modes (previous sentence, previous n words, full context, etc.)
* Performance-optimized version with batching and GPU acceleration
* Support for additional model architectures

Commit message:

Added support for layer-specific surprisal scoring.

README.md, after:

# 🎁 happybirthday 🍰

happybirthday is a python tool to extract surprisal-based features from text.
You can also send the repo link to colleages and friends interested in computational linguistics as a nice gesture for their birthday.

## Features
* Works with AR and masked-token models from Hugging Face
* L2R scoring is available when using a masked-token model. Results should be identical to minicons (tested in multiple situations: see test/test_minicons_compare.py).
* Extracts surprisal, entropy and the next predicted word with the highest probability (i.e. what the LLM computed would be the continuation)
* Works sentence by sentence only (for now), but you can provide a common context file for semantic continuity, it will be prepended to each sentence's context window.
* Choice of greedy algorithm or beam search to identify the most probable next word (will assemble next subtokens to reconstitute the word).
* Minimalism over performance: simple loops used in place of batching, no CUDA, nothing fancy
* Handles accented characters
* Should remain robust to LLM choice, as long as it is AR (GPT-style) or masked token.
* Simple Command Line Interface, and scoring functions can easily be loaded from your own code.

## Installation
* You will need python, install if you don't have it already.
* Install the libraries in requirements.txt:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## How to use

Input is a .tsv file. Expected columns are doc_id and text (in documents mode), or doc_id, sentence_id and sentence (in sentences mode). 
The first row is expected to be the column headers.

### Command Line Interface

```bash
python src/cli.py --input_file <file> --mode <ar|mlm> --model <model_name> [options]
```

#### Required Arguments
- `--input_file`: Path to input TSV file
- `--mode`: Model type - `ar` (autoregressive/GPT-style) or `mlm` (masked/BERT-style)
- `--model`: HuggingFace model name (e.g., `gpt2`, `bert-base-uncased`, `almanach/camembert-base`)


#### Optional Arguments
- `--output_file`: Output path (default: auto-generated with timestamp)
  - Can be a specific filename: `results.tsv`
  - Can be a folder path: `./results/` (auto-generates filename inside your folder)
- `--output_format`: Output format, either `tsv` (default) or `parquet`
- `--format`: Input format - `documents` or `sentences` (default: `sentences`)
- `--left_context_file`: Path to text file for left context (prepended to each sentence)
- `--top_k`: Number of top predictions to output (default: `3`, use `0` to disable)
- `--top_k_cf_surprisal`: If set, output counterfactual surprisal for each top-k prediction (pred_alt columns will be token|surprisal)
- `--layers`: List of layer indices to compute surprisal from (e.g. `--layers 0 5 11`). Option `--layers all` is also possible. If not specified, only the last layer is used.

#### AR Mode Options (GPT-style models)
- `--lookahead_n`: Number of continuation tokens to generate (default: `3`, use `0` to disable)
- `--lookahead_strategy`: Generation strategy - `greedy` or `beam` (default: `greedy`)
- `--beam_width`: Beam width for beam search (default: `3`, only used with `--lookahead_strategy beam`)

#### MLM Mode Options (BERT-style models)
- `--pll_metric`: Scoring variant - `original` or `within_word_l2r` (default: `original`)

### Examples

**Basic usage (AR model):**
```bash
python src/cli.py --input_file data.tsv --mode ar --model gpt2
```

**French MLM with L2R scoring:**
```bash
python src/cli.py --input_file in/demo_sentences.tsv --mode mlm --model cmarkea/distilcamembert-base --pll_metric within_word_l2r
```

**Documents format with context:**
```bash
python src/cli.py --input_file docs.tsv --format documents --mode ar --model gpt2 --left_context_file context.txt
```

**Output to specific folder:**
```bash
python src/cli.py --input_file data.tsv --mode mlm --model bert-base-uncased --output_file ./results/
```


**Surprisal by specific layers:**
```bash
python src/cli.py --input_file data.tsv --mode ar --model gpt2 --layers 0 5 11
```

**AR with beam search lookahead:**
```bash
python src/cli.py --input_file data.tsv --mode ar --model gpt2 --lookahead_n 5 --lookahead_strategy beam --beam_width 3
```

### Output Format


#### Main Results File

The output TSV contains:
- `doc_id`, `sentence_id`, `token_index`: Identifiers
- `token`: Raw token (with special characters like `▁`, `Ġ`)
- `token_decoded`: Human-readable token
- `is_special`: Flag for special tokens (BOS, EOS, CLS, SEP, etc.)
- `surprisal_bits`, `entropy_bits`: Surprisal and entropy from the last layer (default)
- `layer{idx}_surprisal_bits`, `layer{idx}_entropy_bits`: Surprisal and entropy for each requested layer (if `--layers` is used)
- `pred_alt_1` to `pred_alt_N`: Top-k alternative predictions (N = `--top_k`)
- `pred_next_1` to `pred_next_M`: Lookahead predictions (M = `--lookahead_n`, AR mode only)

**Note**: All special tokens are included in output. Filter using `is_special` column in post-processing if needed.

## Direct Function Calls

You can also import and use the core functions directly in Python, for instance, assuming the scorer.py script is in the same folder:

```python
from scorer import process_sentences

# Standard scoring with predictions
results = process_sentences(
    sentences=["Hello world.", "How are you?"],
    mode='ar',
    model_name='gpt2',
    top_k=5,
    lookahead_n=3,
    progress=True
)
```

## Testing

Test the basics:
```bash
python test/test_basics.py
```

Compare with minicons (MLM L2R scoring):
```bash
python test/test_minicons_compare.py
```

## TODO

* Create R wrapper/package
* Add different context window modes (previous sentence, previous n words, full context, etc.)
* Performance-optimized version with batching and GPU acceleration
* Support for additional model architectures
